TRHAI — INDEPENDENT VERIFICATION BRIEF
======================================

Paste this whole file into ChatGPT, Perplexity, or any other assistant and ask
it to review the design and tell you what to check. It is written to be read by
someone with no prior context.

Please be sceptical. If something below looks wrong, say so plainly. Several
claims here were wrong when first written and were only caught by testing them.


WHAT THIS IS
------------
A local-first AI desktop assistant, built for one person on one Windows machine.
Nothing is sent to any cloud service. There are no API keys anywhere: every
model runs locally through Ollama.

Stack:
  - apps/api          Express + TypeScript, port 4000. All the real work.
  - apps/trhai-web    Next.js 16 / React 19, port 3210. The single screen.
  - apps/desktop      Electron shell that starts the other two.
  - packages/shared   Planning and code-generation shared by the above.
  - apps/web          An older Vite client, superseded. Not loaded by the app.

Local models installed:
  vexora:latest      1.9 GB   general chat
  qwen2.5-coder:7b   4.7 GB   used for writing and editing code
  qwen2.5:3b         1.9 GB

Current state: 1380 tests passing, 0 failing, 0 TypeScript errors.
  apps/api 883, packages/shared 254, apps/trhai-web 108, apps/web 85, desktop 50


THE DESIGN RULE EVERYTHING FOLLOWS
----------------------------------
The interface may only show things that are actually true. No fake progress
bars, no invented data, no claiming an action succeeded unless it did. Most of
the work below was fixing places where that rule was broken.

Concrete examples of that rule in force:
  - A reading that cannot be taken shows a dash, not a stale number.
  - A sparkline draws a gap where nothing was measured, never a straight line.
  - A generated app is only reported as built after its own checks pass.
  - A failed edit reports failure and changes nothing.


HOW TO RUN IT
-------------
  cd D:\trhai
  npm install                       (first time only)
  npm test                          expect 1380 passing, 0 failing
  npm run typecheck                 expect no output
  npm run dev:api                   API on port 4000
  npm run dev --workspace trhai-web -- -p 3210      UI on port 3210

Or launch the desktop app: Launch-Vexora.bat


WHAT TO VERIFY, AND WHAT SHOULD HAPPEN
--------------------------------------
1. ONE SCREEN
   Open http://localhost:3210
   Expect: a single page. No navigation links, no tabs, no routes but "/".
   Check:  the page source should contain zero <a href="/..."> links.
   Two edge handles (CONSOLE, ACTIVITY) open side rails. Those are the only
   things that change what is on screen.

2. IT IS SHOWING REAL DATA
   The top strip shows CPU, RAM, GPU as live percentages with sparklines, plus
   the real username and a ticking clock.
   Check:  compare CPU/RAM against Task Manager. They should track.
   Check:  stop the API (kill the process on port 4000). Within ~4 seconds the
           readings must become "—" and the core must turn grey and say NO
           CONNECTION. They must NOT keep showing the last numbers.
           This was a real bug: stale readings were displayed as current.

3. IT SAYS WHAT IT IS DOING
   Ask it anything that needs a tool ("how many files are in my workspace?").
   Expect: an OPERATIONS panel listing each real step with a real duration and
           a tick or a cross. A running step shows elapsed time counting up.
   There is deliberately no percentage or progress bar, because nothing in the
   app knows how far along a step is.

4. BUILDING APPS
   Ask: "build me a password generator"
   Expect: it writes files to D:\Vexora\workspace\<name>\, runs the app's own
           smoke checks, and only then reports success.
   Then:   cd into that folder and run `node server.js`, open the port. It
           should be a working password generator, not a database.

   This is the part most worth scrutinising. Two shapes use fixed templates
   (records apps like "track my books"; calculators). Everything else is
   written by qwen2.5-coder and is genuinely variable — it retries up to three
   times and reports failure if all three fail.

   Known limits, by design: single-page Node apps with a browser UI and no npm
   packages. No native or mobile apps, no databases, no large codebases.

5. RUNNING COMMANDS
   Ask: "run the command: node --version"
   Expect: the real version, and a row in OPERATIONS showing what ran.

6. EDITING EXISTING CODE
   Make a small file somewhere outside the workspace, then ask it to change one
   line. Expect the change to be made and THE REST OF THE FILE TO SURVIVE.
   This is worth checking carefully: it used to rewrite whole files and silently
   drop things like `module.exports`. There is now an edit_file tool that
   replaces exact text only, and refuses if the text appears twice.

7. VOICE
   Replies are read aloud by default, using a local Piper voice (no cloud).
   The console rail has a voice picker with a preview button, a speed slider,
   and a delivery setting.
   Check:  the voice named in the UI must match the voice you actually hear.
           It used to name the service default while a different voice spoke.


MACHINE ACCESS — PLEASE REVIEW THIS PART CLOSELY
------------------------------------------------
This is the highest-risk area and the owner asked for it deliberately.

Machine access is ON BY DEFAULT. With it on, the assistant can:
  - run any shell command as the user, in their home directory
  - read any file on the disk
  - write to any file EXCEPT Windows system locations

It was previously off until switched on for 30 minutes at a time. The owner
found that wrong for a personal assistant on their own machine and asked for it
to be always on. The switch still exists in the console rail and turning it off
is honoured and persists across restarts.

The guardrails that remain:
  - Writes to C:\Windows, C:\Program Files, C:\Program Files (x86) and
    C:\ProgramData\Microsoft are refused even with access on. Reads are not
    restricted. The reason is not distrust of the user — it is that a 7B local
    model makes mistakes, and a mistake aimed at System32 is not recoverable.
  - Scheduled/unattended runs do NOT get machine access, whatever the switch
    says. Granting access is for working at the machine; a schedule firing at
    3am should not inherit it.
  - Every command that runs is logged with its output and exit code.
  - Destructive tools (forget, delete_document, run_command) are classified at
    a permission level that requires confirmation.
  - Set TRHAI_MACHINE_ACCESS=off to restore the closed default.

QUESTIONS WORTH ASKING ABOUT THIS:
  - Is "on by default with a persistent off switch" a defensible design for a
    single-user local assistant? What would you change?
  - The protected-write list is prefix-based on the running platform only. Are
    there Windows locations that should be on it and are not?
  - Model-authored code is written to disk after validation (path safety, size
    caps, allowed extensions, it must parse as JavaScript) but is NEVER
    executed automatically. Is compile-checking without running the right line
    to draw?
  - Is excluding unattended runs from machine access sufficient, or should
    scheduled tasks be blocked from file writes entirely?


THINGS THAT ARE KNOWN-IMPERFECT (do not report these as discoveries)
--------------------------------------------------------------------
  - App generation succeeds roughly 1 attempt in 3; three failures reports
    failure. A build takes 25-100 seconds.
  - The local models are small. They sometimes fail to call a tool at all and
    just acknowledge the request. Coding requests are routed to the coder model
    specifically because the chat model was unreliable at this.
  - apps/web is dead code kept in the repo. Nothing loads it.
  - Tasks, personality and accent controls live in the side rails, not the main
    screen, because the owner asked for the main screen to be only the visual,
    the text box and the microphone.


WHAT WOULD BE GENUINELY USEFUL FROM YOU
---------------------------------------
  1. Security review of the machine-access design above.
  2. Anywhere the app could still claim something it has not verified.
  3. Whether the app-generation approach (templates for two shapes, local model
     for everything else, with retries and validation) is the right structure,
     or whether there is a better one for a 7B local model.
  4. Failure modes not covered: what happens on a full disk, a locked file, a
     model that returns something adversarial.

Please distinguish clearly between things you have reasoned about and things
you would need to run to know.
